Monthly report may (#892)
input-output-hk/hydra: docs/monthly/2023-05-monthly.md

---
title: May 2023
slug: 2023-05
authors: [ch1bo, pgrange, ffakenz]
tags: [monthly]
---

This report summarizes the work on Hydra since April 2023. It serves as
preparation for the monthly review meeting (see [slides][slides] and
[recording][recording]), where the team updates project stakeholders on recent
developments to gather their feedback on proposed plans.

## Roadmap

> This month we released version 0.10.0 which includes many important features.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This month the team released version 0.10.0 which includes many important features.
```

The project [roadmap](https://github.com/orgs/input-output-hk/projects/21) was
only slightly updated this month and already saw one more feature completed:

![](./img/2023-05-roadmap-ex-ideas.png) <small><center>The roadmap without idea items</center></small>

#### Release 0.10.0

- First mainnet compatible release of `hydra-node` including technical changes and documentation

- Mainnet exposure currently limited to 100₳ per participant

- Added some missing features to the client API (short-term solutions)

- Some quality of life improvements in running the `hydra-node`

- [Full release notes](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/releases/tag/0.10.0) and list of [delivered features](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/milestone/8?closed=1)

#### Notable roadmap updates

- Got new input and concrete scenario for benchmarking (off-chain) performance

>   of a Hydra Head. As it is a very basic one, we conretized the item from an

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  of a Hydra Head. As it is a very basic one, we moved the item from an
```

>   of a Hydra Head. As it is a very basic one, we conretized the item from an

Reviewer 2: Consider changing to Hydra head, if this is not about the actual protocol.

  idea to a feature and started work on it.

- Added a new feature item to add Hydra as tool to developer platforms within
  our agenda of [promoting Hydra as an open-source
  platform](https://hydra.family/head-protocol/monthly/2023-01#themes-for-2023)
  for scalability on Cardano.

> - Already completed a first feature for 0.11.0 and considering to release it as

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Already completed a first feature for 0.11.0 and considering whether to release it as
```

  early as possible with latest advances.

![](./img/2023-05-roadmap.png) <small><center>The latest roadmap with features and ideas</center></small>

## Development

[Issues and pull requests closed since last
report](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/issues?q=is%3Aclosed+sort%3Aupdated-desc+closed%3A2023-04-26..2023-05-24)

This month, the team worked on the following:

#### Timed transactions [#196](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/issues/196#)

To realize the Hydra Head protocol, a `hydra-node` observes and follows the
chain progress on the layer 1 (L1). Until now, this component was only observing
protocol related transactions. Now, on every block roll forward, a `Tick` event
carrying the notion of time from L1 is observed by the `hydra-node` and is used
to validate transactions in a Hydra head. This means that clients can submit
time bounded transactions to an open head and expect them to be validated using

> the same slot that would be used on L1. It is important to mention, that time

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the same slot that would be used on L1. It is important to mention that time
```

> only advances on L1 when a block was produced.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
only advances on L1 when a block is produced.
```

![](./img/2023-05-timed-transactions.jpg) <small><center>Timed transactions in a Hydra Head state channel</center></small>

> This feature will make the Hydra L2 ledger now en-par with UTxO features

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This feature will make the Hydra L2 ledger now en-par with UTXO features
```

> This feature will make the Hydra L2 ledger now en-par with UTxO features

Reviewer: en-par is not an English word, and its meaning is not clear to me from the context. I suggest you use different words.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
With this feature Hydra L2 ledger matches more UTxO features
```

available on the Cardano L1. A logical next step in this direction could be to
make time in the state channel advance every configured `slotLength` (e.g. every

> second) using the system clock in between blocks as a form of [dead reckoning](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dead_reckoning).

Reviewer: We normally don't use links to Wikipedia. Merriam-Webster is preferred.
```suggestion
second) using the system clock in between blocks as a form of [dead reckoning](https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/dead%20reckoning).
```

Reviewer 3: Thank you @NeilBurgess42 . In that particular case, the wikipedia page carries more information to help here.

#### Removing --ledger-genesis [#863](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/pull/863)

The hydra-node was taking two command line options to configure the ledger used

> to validate transactions on layer 2: `--ledger-protocol-parameters` and

Reviewer 2: consider saying layer 2 (L2) - for consistency with the first layer 1 (L1) mention

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
to validate transactions on layer 2 (L2): `--ledger-protocol-parameters` and
```

> `--ledger-genesis`. The former is quite self-explanatory the Cardano protocol

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`--ledger-genesis`. The former is quite self-explanatory; the Cardano protocol
```

> parameters which shall be used. Often the same as on the layer 1 are configure,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
parameters which shall be used. Often the same as on the layer 1 are configured,
```

> or similar parameters with less fees for example. The second option however, was

Reviewer: ```suggestion
or similar parameters with less fees for example. The second option, however, was
```

requiring the `genesis-shelley.json` as used for the cardano-node used to
initialize the shelley era back in the day.

When we started using the current slot in the L2 ledger (see above), we realized
that only the start time and slot length are effectively used from that
configuration file. Moreoever, it would be quite surprising if those are
different and slots would be longer or shorter on L2 (unless explicitly

> configured). We opted to remove the option alltogether and have the `hydra-node`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
configured). We opted to remove the option altogether and have the `hydra-node`
```

fetch the genesis parameters from the Cardano network. This makes the system

> easier to configure and more isomorphic.

Reviewer: Is isomorphic the word you want? How about this?
```suggestion
easier to configure, with more consistent parameters.
```

> #### Improving CI runtime

Reviewer: For this section, I have left the 'we' and 'our' references in, because IMO it's clear who is being discussed. Normally the style guide suggests not to use them.

> The hydra project [embraces Test Driven Development](./adr/12) and our code is

Reviewer 2: Hydra - should be capitalized

> quite covered, at several level. You may already have seen our test pyramid.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
quite covered, at several levels. You may already have seen our test pyramid.
```

> quite covered, at several level. You may already have seen our test pyramid.

Reviewer 2: Consider changing to 'the test pyramid'

![test pyramid](./img/2023-05-test-pyramide.png) <small><center>Testing pyramid</center></small>

Although we expect the tests to be executed locally on developers' machines, we
also implement a [Continuous

> Integration](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/actions/workflows/ci.yaml),

Reviewer 2: Add (C.I) after Continuous Integration so that the abbreviation is clear in the following mentions. I first got confused and left another comment then realizing what that stands for :)

checking all these tests still pass and more.

This is fine until you realize that your C.I. can take as long as an hour or
more and it has subtle implications on your workflow. A first, obvious, impact
for us is that we want all our branches to be [fast-forward with
master](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/wiki/Coding-Standards#merge-prs-with-merge-commits-and-rebase-branches-on-top-of-master)
before merging them. In practice, imagine your pull request is all green,
everybody approves it and all the tests pass but it's lagging a bit behind
master. You'll have to rebase your branch and wait for C.I. to prove it still

> works before merging. Know imagine your C.I. takes an hour or more and you have

Reviewer 2: Should it be 'Now' instead of 'Know'?

> more than one branch to merge... you can always feel it, don't you?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
more than one branch to merge... you can always feel it, can't you?
```

So let's see what's going on there and let's take a look at this run from [may
the 10th](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/actions/runs/4933005294):
- Building and testing takes 19 minutes for the longest
- Generating haddock documentation and running the benchmarks takes 28 minutes
  for the longest

> - documentation (which will need artifact generated in previous steps) will take

Reviewer: 'artifacts' or 'an artifact'
```suggestion
- documentation (which will need artifacts generated in previous steps) will take
```

  14 minutes
- In total, this run took 1 hour and 16 minutes.

Our first focus has been on the build and test stage. We're expecting the
plutus-merkle-tree to run fast but [it took 8 minutes and 52
seconds](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/actions/runs/4933005294/jobs/8816564512)
and if we look in detail, we can see that 7m and 11 seconds have been spent

> setting up the build environment. Stated otherwise, 81% of the build time is

Reviewer: 'in other words' is more commonly used than 'stated otherwise'. It's better if the reader doesn't notice something distracting.
```suggestion
setting up the build environment. In other words, 81% of the build time is
```

downloading binary dependencies from some nix cache. How can we reduce the size
of our dependencies?

If we want to compile our code and run the test, we need cabal and other nix
dependencies that will download _the world_ before doing anything. But what if
we decide to, straight on, run the test with nix and let it decide what it needs
to compile because, maybe, most of our code did not change, the test binary is
already available in some cache and we just run it!

> This what we did in [#867](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/pull/867).

Reviewer 2: This **is** what we did...

> Merging this P.R. the [build on master took 45

Reviewer 2: We usually use PR instead of P.R.

minutes](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/actions/runs/5003046049) and,
specifically, the same [plutus-merkle-tree
job](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/actions/runs/5003046049/jobs/8963773583)
only took 1 minute and 44 seconds, only 20% of the time observed before.

Then we decided that we wanted to spend less time on documentation (14 minutes,

> remember). It happened that most of the time spent by this process is web-site

Reviewer 2: website

optimization. That's fine for master because we want to publish an optimized

> web-site. But what about all the builds in branches for which the web-site will

Reviewer 2: same here, website instead of 'web-site'

never be published? We need to keep this documentation step in branches because

> it also provide us security by checking that we didn't introduce too much mess

Reviewer: ```suggestion
it also provides security by checking that we didn't introduce too much mess
```

> in the doc, like broken links, for instance. But we definitely got rid of the

Reviewer 2: 'got rid' is a bit informal

optmization step.

That is what we did in [#880](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/pull/880)
and it helped up [save 10 minutes from this
step](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/actions/runs/5067084637/jobs/9098252031).

Our first goal was to reduce coninuous integration execution time when pushing
on branches and this has been improved. We're now having execution time
significantly under 30 minutes where it used to be 45 minutes or event an hour.

> We had some issue with compilation output, swallowed by nix, which have been

Reviewer 2: I suggest replacing 'swallowed' with something else too, unless it is commonly used in development language??

solved by [#889](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/pull/889).

Every morning, we rebuild our master branch and we can observe the whole
execution time on the following graph (in seconds):

![CI perf](./img/2023-05-ci-perf.png) <small><center>C.I. execution total execution time</center></small>

> Although we got performance improvement on branches C.I. execution time, we

Reviewer 2: Suggest updating this whole paragraph:
'Although we have observed performance improvement in branch C.I. execution time, we have not observed significant benefits when examining execution time on the master branch. We can save some time in the documentation step since, ultimately, we do not need to optimize the website for the unstable version, potentially saving around 10 minutes. However, the more significant issue here is the variability in the process.

don't observe so much benefit when we look at execution time on master. We can
save some time on the documentation step because, after all, we don't care about
optimizing the web-site for the unstable version to probably save 10 minutes.
But what's more problematic here is the process variability.

This variability can be explained by nix cache misses. That's something we need
to investigate. It's hard to optimize a process with buffer and we do have quite
some buffer in place here and in case of a cache miss, it means we have to
recompile everything and it happens that compiling takes time for us. So every

> cache miss introduce several minutes of overhead which explain why we observe so

Reviewer: ```suggestion
cache miss introduces several minutes of overhead which explain why we observe so
```

> much variations between two days with this master excution time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
much variation between two days with this master excution time.
```

Next steps:

> - Why do we have random cache miss that we do not expect?

Reviewer 2: - inspect why we have an unexpected random cache miss

> - Improve haddock generation time (15 minutes)

Reviewer 2: - improve... (lowercase for consistency)

- reduce bench time (we probably don't want to run the whole benchmark suite for
  every single commit, or a smaller one)

> - focus on changed area (do not compile everything to generate the monthly

Reviewer 2: the changed area

  report)

## Community

#### Hydrozoa [#850](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/discussions/850)

This month, the project saw a new kind of contribution from the community.
@GeorgeFlerovsky has written a research piece about an adaptation of the
(Coordinated) Hydra Head protocol into a new flavor - Hydrozoa. The article is

> currently getting examined and [discussed on

Reviewer: ```suggestion
currently being examined and [discussed on
```

Github](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/discussions/850). Feedback so
far has been positive. Of course, one does not simply change the Hydra Head
protocol (pun intended), but the ideas contained could drive evolution and

> followed-up with concrete protocol extensions. Very much like the ideas

Reviewer: ```suggestion
be followed up with concrete protocol extensions. Very much like the ideas
```

presented in the original paper.

#### Hydra for Payments project update

> In this collaborative effort between IOG and ObsidianSystems, we are pushing the

Reviewer: It's quite clear who 'we' are.

frontiers of using Hydra in payment use cases. It will lower the entry barrier
for developers and ultimately users to leverage the Hydra Layer 2 for sending

> and receiving ADA and Cardano native assets with very low fees and sub-second

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and receiving ada and Cardano native assets with very low fees and sub-second
```

finality.

> The project is in it's second phase where the open-source

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The project is in its second phase where the open-source
```

> [hydra-pay](https://github.com/obsidiansystems/hydra-pay) library is getting

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[hydra-pay](https://github.com/obsidiansystems/hydra-pay) library is being
```

> expanded with necessary features while the team pushes for a building a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
expanded with necessary features while the team pushes for building a
```

dedicated mobile application.

With the recently released hydra-pay version
[0.2.0](https://github.com/obsidiansystems/hydra-pay/releases/tag/v0.2.0), an

> end-to-end workflow of the Android App nick-named "HydraNow" can be realized.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
end-to-end workflow of the Android App nicknamed "HydraNow" can be realized.
```

This app will act as a layer 2 wallet quite like a Bitcoin Lightning Wallet and

> drives feature development in both, `hydra-pay` and `hydra` in the background.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
drives feature development in both `hydra-pay` and `hydra` in the background.
```

This feature will make the Hydra L2 ledger now en-par with UTxO features
available on the Cardano L1. A logical next step in this direction could be to
make time in the state channel advance every configured `slotLength` (e.g. every
second) using the system clock in between blocks as a form of [dead reckoning](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dead_reckoning).

#### Removing --ledger-genesis [#863](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/pull/863)

The hydra-node was taking two command line options to configure the ledger used
to validate transactions on layer 2: `--ledger-protocol-parameters` and
`--ledger-genesis`. The former is quite self-explanatory the Cardano protocol
parameters which shall be used. Often the same as on the layer 1 are configure,
or similar parameters with less fees for example. The second option however, was
requiring the `genesis-shelley.json` as used for the cardano-node used to
initialize the shelley era back in the day.

When we started using the current slot in the L2 ledger (see above), we realized
that only the start time and slot length are effectively used from that

> configuration file. Moreoever, it would be quite surprising if those are

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
configuration file. Moreoever, it would be quite surprising if those were
```

different and slots would be longer or shorter on L2 (unless explicitly
configured). We opted to remove the option alltogether and have the `hydra-node`
fetch the genesis parameters from the Cardano network. This makes the system

> easier to configure and more isomorphic.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
easier to configure and more isomorphic to L1.
```

#### Improving CI runtime

> The hydra project [embraces Test Driven Development](./adr/12) and our code is

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The Hydra project [embraces Test Driven Development](./adr/12) and our code is
```

quite covered, at several level. You may already have seen our test pyramid.

![test pyramid](./img/2023-05-test-pyramide.png) <small><center>Testing pyramid</center></small>

Although we expect the tests to be executed locally on developers' machines, we
also implement a [Continuous

> Integration](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/actions/workflows/ci.yaml),

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Integration](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/actions/workflows/ci.yaml) (C.I.),
```

checking all these tests still pass and more.

This is fine until you realize that your C.I. can take as long as an hour or
more and it has subtle implications on your workflow. A first, obvious, impact
for us is that we want all our branches to be [fast-forward with
master](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/wiki/Coding-Standards#merge-prs-with-merge-commits-and-rebase-branches-on-top-of-master)
before merging them. In practice, imagine your pull request is all green,
everybody approves it and all the tests pass but it's lagging a bit behind
master. You'll have to rebase your branch and wait for C.I. to prove it still

> works before merging. Know imagine your C.I. takes an hour or more and you have

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
works before merging. Now imagine your C.I. takes an hour or more and you have
```

- Building and testing takes 19 minutes for the longest
- Generating haddock documentation and running the benchmarks takes 28 minutes
  for the longest
- documentation (which will need artifact generated in previous steps) will take
  14 minutes
- In total, this run took 1 hour and 16 minutes.

Our first focus has been on the build and test stage. We're expecting the
plutus-merkle-tree to run fast but [it took 8 minutes and 52
seconds](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/actions/runs/4933005294/jobs/8816564512)
and if we look in detail, we can see that 7m and 11 seconds have been spent
setting up the build environment. Stated otherwise, 81% of the build time is
downloading binary dependencies from some nix cache. How can we reduce the size
of our dependencies?

If we want to compile our code and run the test, we need cabal and other nix
dependencies that will download _the world_ before doing anything. But what if
we decide to, straight on, run the test with nix and let it decide what it needs
to compile because, maybe, most of our code did not change, the test binary is
already available in some cache and we just run it!

> This what we did in [#867](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/pull/867).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This is what we did in [#867](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/pull/867).
```

> Merging this P.R. the [build on master took 45

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Merging this PR the [build on master took 45
```

minutes](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/actions/runs/5003046049) and,
specifically, the same [plutus-merkle-tree
job](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/actions/runs/5003046049/jobs/8963773583)
only took 1 minute and 44 seconds, only 20% of the time observed before.

Then we decided that we wanted to spend less time on documentation (14 minutes,

> remember). It happened that most of the time spent by this process is web-site

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
remember). It happened that most of the time spent by this process is website
```

optimization. That's fine for master because we want to publish an optimized

> web-site. But what about all the builds in branches for which the web-site will

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
website. But what about all the builds in branches for which the web-site will
```

never be published? We need to keep this documentation step in branches because
it also provide us security by checking that we didn't introduce too much mess

> in the doc, like broken links, for instance. But we definitely got rid of the

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
in the doc, like broken links, for instance. But we definitely removed the
```

optmization step.

That is what we did in [#880](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/pull/880)
and it helped up [save 10 minutes from this
step](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/actions/runs/5067084637/jobs/9098252031).

Our first goal was to reduce coninuous integration execution time when pushing
on branches and this has been improved. We're now having execution time
significantly under 30 minutes where it used to be 45 minutes or event an hour.

> We had some issue with compilation output, swallowed by nix, which have been

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We had some issues with compilation output, obfuscated by nix, which have been
```

solved by [#889](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/pull/889).

Every morning, we rebuild our master branch and we can observe the whole
execution time on the following graph (in seconds):

![CI perf](./img/2023-05-ci-perf.png) <small><center>C.I. execution total execution time</center></small>

Although we got performance improvement on branches C.I. execution time, we
don't observe so much benefit when we look at execution time on master. We can
save some time on the documentation step because, after all, we don't care about
optimizing the web-site for the unstable version to probably save 10 minutes.
But what's more problematic here is the process variability.

This variability can be explained by nix cache misses. That's something we need
to investigate. It's hard to optimize a process with buffer and we do have quite
some buffer in place here and in case of a cache miss, it means we have to
recompile everything and it happens that compiling takes time for us. So every
cache miss introduce several minutes of overhead which explain why we observe so
much variations between two days with this master excution time.

Next steps:

> - Why do we have random cache miss that we do not expect?

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- inspect why we have an unexpected random cache miss
```

- Improve haddock generation time (15 minutes)
- reduce bench time (we probably don't want to run the whole benchmark suite for
  every single commit, or a smaller one)

> - focus on changed area (do not compile everything to generate the monthly

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- focus on the changed area (do not compile everything to generate the monthly
```
